FAQs about Counselling

What is Counselling?

Counselling is a talking therapy that provides a safe and confidential space for you to talk to a trained professional (Counsellor or Therapist) about any issues and concerns.
Sometimes it can be helpful to have someone independent to listen and support, to help you make sense of your situation and find your own answers. Counselling can give you an opportunity to explore, discover and clarify ways of living more resourcefully with a greater sense of fulfilment.
Counselling is a common service that many people will use throughout their lives, not just those with a formally diagnosed mental illness.
Further Reading: BACP – What is Counselling.

Student Feedback:
"I would say thank you to my counsellor. Thank you for getting me through the tough times of my life. As an international student, my counsellor was the first local person I was able to be open with. That means a lot to me."

Counsellor, Psychotherapist, Psychoanalyst, Clinical Psychologist, Psychiatrist – Some common definitions:

Counsellor & Psychotherapist: Counselling and Psychotherapy are generic terms that cover a range of talking therapies. They are likely to help clients understand themselves, their behaviours, and relationships with others.
Psychoanalyst: Psychoanalysts are trained to help clients explore and analyse in depth their own unconscious defences and internal conflicts. Once these are understood, then it is easier to change unwanted behaviours, or develop more useful ones.
Clinical Psychologist: Clinical Psychologists are trained in behavioural sciences. This means they can help examine unwanted behaviours and explain how these might be changed.
Psychiatrist: A Psychiatrist is a trained and qualified Doctor, who has specialist training in diagnosing and treating mental health problems.

Student Feedback:
"My counsellor was always very welcoming and easy to talk to. I really appreciate the space they provided during such a difficult time for me. I was allowed to be truly honest about how I feel with no judgement, and I am thankful for that."

Who works in the UON Counselling Service?

We have a mix of Counsellors and Psychotherapists working within the UON Counselling Service.
Staff within the Counselling Service may use the terms Counsellor, Therapist or Psychotherapist when referring to their professional identity.
There are many ways of working or modalities in counselling and psychotherapy. The Counsellors and Therapists at UON may be trained in one approach or use techniques from different methods if they think this may help you.
All our Counsellors are members of the British Association for Counselling & Psychotherapy (BACP) or equivalent governing body and adhere to their standards and must work to an Ethical Framework.
For more information, including our photos and profiles, please see: https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Pages/counselling-service.aspx (UON login required).
Further Reading: BACP – Types of Therapy

Student Feedback:
"The staff are amazing and really helped me to manage during a very difficult time."

Will Counselling work?

Counselling, and talking therapies more generally, have been shown to work well for many people.
It is difficult to say whether counselling will work well for you or not because it depends on lots of factors, some of which include (MIND):
What you want help with.
Your relationship with your Counsellor.
Your feelings around counselling generally.
It might help to ask yourself beforehand:
Am I ready to explore my feelings, thoughts, and behaviour?
Do I feel able to be open about things that are very personal or hard to talk about?
Is there anything else I need to get help with first?
Counselling isn't a quick fix, so it might take some time to see whether it is helping you or not and it isn't right for everyone.

Student Feedback:
"Before the first counselling session, I was quite sceptical of it. However, speaking with my counsellor came quite naturally. They understood my issues and have been a great listener. My counsellor helped me solve many problems and deal with the ongoing ones."

Do I need Counselling?

Every student seen has a unique set of circumstances and requires different levels of support. Your concerns may be related to university, or to anything else in your life, past or present.
Counselling can be helpful when feeling painful emotions, facing difficult decisions, to improve or change relationships or to help in developing a better understanding of self and / or others.
You can request to access the Counselling Service whenever you feel you need to speak to someone in confidence about your feelings.
You don't need to be diagnosed with a mental health problem to access counselling.
Ultimately, the decision to seek counselling is yours to make, and it is important to consider your own needs and preferences when making this decision.

Student Feedback:
"I found working with my counsellor to be enlightening. Together we explored things about myself that I wasn't aware of or ready to process. I felt listened to and understood without any judgement. They offered me relevant and helpful resources that will continue to aid me following the completion of counselling sessions. I now feel better equipped to self-manage and know where I can go to get more help. Thank you."

Am I eligible for Counselling?

We accept students from any level of studies, from foundation through to PhD.
You must be enrolled, have a student ID number and UON student email address.
You can access counselling if you are taking a study break or suspended from your studies, as long as you continue to remain an enrolled student.
You can access support if your appeal against being terminated from your studies has been upheld and you have re-enrolled. In this instance, you may want to access more timely support through the Counselling & Mental Health drop-in: book a drop-in appointment

Student Feedback:
"I think that my counsellor was extremely helpful to me as I have struggled with trusting people I am unfamiliar with, but that was not the case in this regard. I think that I could not have asked for a better counsellor as the experience was truly life changing, in a positive way, for me."

When am I not eligible for Counselling?

You are not eligible to access the Counselling Service if you are not enrolled at the University.
See the What alternatives are there to having counselling at the University question for more information.
You are not eligible to access the Counselling Service if you are already receiving counselling or therapy elsewhere. You can still access support via the Counselling & Mental Health drop-in: book a drop-in appointment
You are not eligible to access the Counselling Service if you are residing abroad. For both ethical and legal reasons, the Counselling Service cannot offer remote counselling to students residing outside of the UK. This is because providing counselling or therapy to someone in another country is subject to the rules and legislation of that country.
See the How can I access support abroad question for more information.

Student Feedback:
"My counsellor was very supportive in providing me with the knowledge, and tools to help me deal with the scenarios I was struggling with. While also supporting my mental health and ensuring the emotions I had felt were understandable. Which allowed me to feel more confident with myself and not as fragile as I was before the sessions."

Do I have to pay for Counselling?

No, you do not have to pay. The UON Counselling Service offers free access to short-term counselling.

Student Feedback:
"I am so grateful that the university provide a service for students such as this. I wouldn't have been able to afford counselling. It was very daunting for me to apply to do it, but it was easy, and I was never made to feel 'silly' or that my problems weren't valid."

What to expect for my first appointment?

An intake appointment is the first appointment you are offered and lasts for 50 minutes.
This gives you a chance to clarify whether counselling is right for you and for us to get to know a bit more about you. This often includes a history of the problems you're experiencing and a chance to tell your story.
All initial intake appointments are via telephone. If you require an alternative (in-person or video appointment), please email counsellors@northampton.ac.uk and we will contact you to discuss alternative options. This is more likely to result in a longer wait to be seen and you may want to access support via the Counselling & Mental Health drop-in: book a drop-in appointment in the meantime.
The intake appointment does not count as one of the up-to-six counselling sessions."

Student Feedback:
"My intake appointment I felt was beneficial as it took a holistic view of my life which highlighted to me sensitive areas that I possibly needed to talk about more."

What to expect for my counselling sessions?

If you decide that you would like to continue with counselling, we may offer short-term counselling of up to six sessions. This provides an opportunity for you to explore and make sense of your thoughts, feelings, and behaviours.
During counselling, your Counsellor may take you through specific strategies designed to help you, or you might have more general discussions about how you're feeling.
You might come with a focus or plan about what you want to talk about, or you may see what comes up for you each session.
Each session lasts for 50 minutes and may be in-person, over the telephone or via a video call. You will be asked your preferences during the intake appointment about how you would like your sessions delivered.
Your sessions will usually be scheduled for the same time on the same day for up to six weeks.

Student Feedback:
"My counsellor was an extremely attentive and understanding person. When I entered their office for the first time, I was talking about things I have never even been able to think about at times let alone deal with! With their guidance and support and my own self willingness to move on with my life they have given me the most confidence that I can have a better quality of living through understanding myself and understanding the world around me! I will always be tremendously grateful for the time and effort they put into our sessions."

How does telephone counselling work?

We will phone you at the agreed appointment time. If there is no answer, we will try again 10 minutes later. However, please be aware, if we start the session late, the length of the session is reduced accordingly.
If there is no answer on our second attempt to call you, we will assume you no longer require the appointment. We will then email you to confirm your next appointment.
If we get disconnected during the call, we will make two attempts to ring you back within a 10-minute timeframe. If we are unable to re-establish contact, we will then email you to confirm your next appointment.
It is important to consider a few key factors:
As we will be discussing confidential information it is very important that you are in a private location and feel safe. Try to find a place where you won't be disturbed. Wearing headphones for your session may help privacy.
If we become aware that you are no longer in a private space, we will pause the session until confidentiality is restored.
During your phone appointment, make sure you have a strong signal and plenty of battery.
The telephone number we call from will usually show up as the University of Northampton on your phone. Occasionally, you may receive a call from a withheld number.
After a session, you might want to take some time away from the room this took place. Spending time in a different room, making yourself a drink or going outside for a short while if you're able to may help everything settle before you return to your usual routine.
Your Counsellor or the Counselling Service will contact you via telephone and / or email if we are required to cancel and rearrange your appointment.

Student Feedback:
"I feel it was the best set of sessions I have received. The option of phone calls was helpful as I found I was able to be more open and honest in this format compared to face to face."

How does video counselling work?

All video appointments are via Microsoft Teams.
You will be sent an email with the link you need to join your video session at the agreed appointment time.
We will open the session at the agreed appointment time and will hold this space for 10 minutes. If by this time, you have not joined the session, we will assume you do not need the session today and will end the appointment. We will then email you the date and time of your next appointment.
If we experience any connectivity issues during the session or if one of us loses the video, we will end the video call. We will restart the call and you can rejoin.
If either of us is unable to rejoin the video call, your Counsellor will call you on the phone number you provided to resume your session.

It is important to consider a few key factors:
As we will be discussing confidential information it is very important that you are in a private location and feel safe. Try to find a place where you won't be disturbed. Wearing headphones for your session may help privacy.
If we become aware that you are no longer in a private space, we will pause the session until confidentiality is restored.
During your appointment, make sure you have a strong signal and a full battery if using your mobile, or power supply if using your computer.
After a session, you might want to take some time away from the room this took place. Spending time in a different room, making yourself a drink or going outside for a short while if you're able to may help everything settle before you return to your usual routine.
Your Counsellor or the Counselling Service will contact you via telephone and / or email if we are required to cancel and rearrange your appointment.

Student Feedback:
"I found the process amazing. I was offered video calls because this is more comfortable for me due to being dyslexic. It was professional and I felt safe during sessions despite working on things that made me uncomfortable. Thank you."

How does in-person counselling work?

You should arrive for your appointment on time and wait in the waiting area for your Counsellor to come and collect you and show you to the room.
We will show you which chair to sit in and you can adjust the angle to make yourself more comfortable. Sometimes people are uncomfortable sitting or staying still for long periods of time, you would be welcome to stand, change position, sit or lie on the floor instead and can discuss this with your Counsellor.
Every room has hooks on the wall, and you are welcome to hang any coats or bags on them for the duration of the session.
If you would like a drink, you are welcome to bring one with you or you can ask your Counsellor who will get you a glass of water.
You are welcome to ask to adjust the lighting, so you feel more relaxed.
We may be able to adjust the temperature of the room and if you are uncomfortable, please ask and we will advise whether we can adjust it or not.
Every counselling room has its own Fiddle Box on the table, where you are welcome to pick one or many items to hold or fiddle with in the session. Your Counsellor cleans each item between sessions.
You will be welcome to wear a face covering if you choose to i.e., mask and / or visor. Your Counsellor may also choose to wear a face covering. Antibacterial gel will be available in each counselling room.
If you are unwell, please let us know in advance and we will offer you an alternative remote appointment by telephone or video until you are recovered.
Your Counsellor or the Counselling Service will contact you via telephone and / or email if we are required to cancel and rearrange your appointment or provide an alternative remote appointment due to illness.

Student Feedback:
"I have had counselling and CBT before however I have never felt so welcomed or understood. We explored aspects of my life in a way I had never done before. I felt like my counsellor shared viewpoints and ideas that allowed me to come to terms with my situation and finally feel validated. I felt anxious starting counselling but towards the end I was looking forward to my sessions."

What happens if I cancel or don't turn up for a session?

Cancellations:
We ask that you give us at least 24-hours if you need to cancel a session. This means that the appointment can be offered to another student.
We understand that sometimes it isn't possible to give 24-hours' notice, and in these situations, we would encourage you to contact your Counsellor or the Counselling Service as soon as you can to let them know that you are unable to make it.
Email: Counsellors@northampton.ac.uk (Usual response is within 2 working days, Mon-Fri).
Telephone: 01604 892253 (Mon-Fri 9-5, voicemail outside of these times).

Missing Sessions:

If you miss one session without letting your Counsellor know, this will count as one of your sessions. They will email you with the date and time of your next appointment.
If you miss two sessions in a row without letting your Counsellor know, they will close your file and email you with information about how you can reapply for counselling in future and where to get support in the meantime.
You may want to access support via the Counselling & Mental Health drop-in: book a drop-in appointment in the meantime.

Student Feedback:
"My counsellor was very supportive in providing me with the knowledge, and tools to help me deal with the scenarios I was struggling with. While also supporting my mental health and ensuring the emotions I had felt were understandable. Which allowed me to feel more confident with myself and not as fragile as I was before the sessions."

What not to expect from my counselling sessions?

Prescribe Medication: Counsellors do not prescribe drugs / medication. Only an appropriate medical practitioner can do this e.g. Doctor / GP or Psychiatrist.
Diagnose: Counsellors do not diagnose. Only an appropriate practitioner can do this e.g. Doctor / GP, Psychiatrist, Dyslexia Assessor.
Advice: Counsellors do not offer advice. They may offer information, but they will not tell you what you should think or do. They will help you find your own solutions - whether that's making effective changes in your life or finding ways of coping with life's challenges.
Solve Practical Problems: Counsellors do not offer help with practical problems, such as financial or housing issues.
Talk about Ourselves: Counsellors do not talk in detail about their own problems. Occasionally, some Counsellors use self-disclosure as a therapeutic tool, when it is clear that the information is being offered to support you, not themselves. Careful and limited use of self-disclosure can sometimes enhance counselling.
We can and will signpost and / or refer you to other teams within UON or to external services who may be able to help you with these areas if this is something you want support with.

Student Feedback:
"I found it really hard at the beginning to understand this journey and how it would actually help. My counsellor made me understand that even though I am talking to them about my issues, I can understand how I am feeling and how to change the way my brain thinks in order to make my own decisions of what I need to do to make myself better. I have really enjoyed these sessions as they have really helped me understand how to process, think, and put into action what I need to do to help myself."

What availability is there for sessions?

The counselling service is predominantly Monday to Friday between the hours of 9-5.
There are no evening or weekend appointments available.
See the What alternatives are there to having counselling at the University question for more information.

Student Feedback:
"Had such a positive experience and am so grateful to have this resource for students."

Can I have counselling more than once?

Yes, you can access the Counselling Service multiple times throughout your University journey.
We do ask that you have at least a three month break after finishing counselling before applying again. This is to give yourself a chance to put what you have learnt into practice.
In the meantime, you can still access support via the Counselling & Mental Health drop-in: book a drop-in appointment.

Student Feedback:
"I've used this service twice now and would definitely recommend / come back to in the future."

Can I change my Counsellor?

We encourage you to first speak with your Counsellor. This is because of the complex nature of the counselling process, where an issue may arise which needs to be addressed during a counselling session. Many complaints can be resolved in this way. Counsellors will always be willing to listen to any concern that you may have and to maintain trust within the counselling relationship.
If this does not resolve the issue, you can request to change your Counsellor and can do so by emailing Counsellors@northampton.ac.uk.
If you have already started your counselling sessions, only the remainder of your sessions will be carried over e.g. if you have had three counselling sessions, then you carry over the remaining three sessions.
Reallocation with someone different may mean a wait of several weeks during busy times of the year.

Student Feedback:
"I was very nervous about seeking counselling however, the university made it so much more bearable by having the resources in place that I was able to seek out help easier when I finally found everything got too much."

How can I access support abroad?

The Counselling & Mental Health Team is currently offering three options for support to students not living in the UK but who have a demonstrable relationship with UON. Service provision is governed by and construed in accordance with English Law and the English Courts have exclusive jurisdiction to deal with any dispute or query arising out of or in connection with them.
One-off Appointment for Students Abroad: Students can request this by emailing either the Counselling Service Counsellors@northampton.ac.uk, Mental Health Service MHA@northampton.ac.uk or by phoning 01604 892253.
Drop-in Support: book a drop-in appointment
Access to online resources, such as self-help resources (UON login required).

Student Feedback:
"I accessed the drop-in service a couple of times. I think I expected that I would talk, and the person would just nod and smile and be reassuring but on both occasions the person I spoke to was able to give me real, practical, meaningful advice (that actually helped) despite the short appointment time and not really knowing me. I would recommend the drop-in service to any student who is struggling emotionally."

How can I contact you or make an appointment?

Someone may have recommended counselling e.g. a friend, family member, University staff member or health professional or you may have decided to try counselling yourself.
The Counselling Service at UON only accepts self-referrals. This means that you will need to complete the Counselling Request Form to book an appointment.

If you would like support with this process, please;
Email: Counsellors@northampton.ac.uk (Usual response is within 2 working days, Mon-Fri).

Telephone: 01604 892253 (Mon-Fri 9-5, voicemail outside of these times)

Student Feedback:
"My counsellor made me feel at ease from the first few minutes. I was able to talk or not talk. I felt no pressure. I was going to give up university and now I feel better equipped to manage. I will be recommending the service to other students who need support."

How do I make a complaint?

We encourage you to first speak with your Counsellor. This is because of the complex nature of the counselling process, where an issue may arise which needs to be addressed during a counselling session. Many complaints can be resolved in this way. Counsellors will always be willing to listen to any concern that you may have and to maintain trust within the counselling relationship.
If your complaint has not been resolved with your Counsellor or is about the Counselling Service, you can discuss this with the Senior Counsellor and / or the Counselling & Mental Health Manager;
Senior Counsellor: Suzy Wallace: Counsellors@northampton.ac.uk
Counselling & Mental Health Manager: Jo Lester, MHA@northampton.ac.uk
If you wish to make a formal complaint, you can find further information in the Complaints Form. (UON login required).
You can get independent support and advice from the Student Union and can contact them via email at su.advice@northampton.ac.uk.
The Counsellors are all members of The British Association for Counsellors & Psychotherapists (BACP) who have their own complaints procedure. Further details can be found here: How to complain about a BACP member.

Student Feedback:
"My counsellor trusted me to open up to them and allowed our therapeutic relationship to blossom overtime and offered appropriate guidance and input when needed. Moreover, my counsellor was open to me correcting their interpretations and validated me and my experiences."

Can I change the day/time of my appointment each week?

Counselling sessions will usually be at the same time and on the same day for up to six weeks.
Each Counsellor has a fixed number of appointments that they can offer during their working hours. During the academic year, these appointments will be allocated to different students. This means that it is often not possible to change your appointment day and time each week.
We will try wherever possible to accommodate your preference, but this is not always possible.
We encourage you to first speak with your Counsellor, they will be able to talk through your options, which may include;
What you feel you need to prioritise currently.
Considering asking for protected time to attend appointments – this may be with your Lecturers or through Placement Mentors. The Counselling Service will not share your attendance as this is confidential information, but you may choose to do this yourself.
Wait until after placement has finished or arrange your shifts to give yourself time to attend appointments.
Consider alternative counselling options external to UON.
See the What alternatives are there to having counselling at the University question for more information.
Use the Counselling & Mental Health drop-in for support on an ad hoc / as needed basis. Drop-in Support: book a drop-in appointment

Student Feedback:
"I was afforded flexibility for sessions whilst on placement and also around a birthday."

Will you tell my lecturers/family/Doctor etc that I am having counselling?

The Counselling Service is confidential. Confidentiality is maintained within the Counselling & Mental Health Team, which includes the Team Administrator. We will not pass on any information about you (including information on attendance at appointments) to anyone outside the Counselling & Mental Health Team, subject to the following exceptions:

Counsellors require regular supervision of their work by an external, independent and experienced practitioner. Supervisors are also bound by the same or a similar code of ethics as counsellors in terms of confidentiality.
Where we have your express written consent to disclose information or data for a specified reason or purpose.
Where we would be liable to civil or criminal court procedure if the information was not disclosed. This includes any act that could be perceived as contravening the Terrorism Act, Drug Trafficking Act or Money Laundering Regulations or if a Court of Law subpoenas our case notes.
Where in extreme circumstances and in the professional opinion of the Counselling Service, serious harm may come to you and / or others involved with you.
Consent to disclose information will be sought from you whenever possible.

Student Feedback:
"My counsellor was absolutely amazing; they had a great understanding and the professional relationship we had was excellent for me. Receiving the best care possible in attending a successful run of counselling that has helped me in all ways with my personal and study life to carry on at university and help me in life."

What are the exceptions to confidentiality?

The Counselling Service is confidential. Confidentiality is maintained within the Counselling & Mental Health Team, which includes the Team Administrator. We will not pass on any information about you (including information on attendance at appointments) to anyone outside the Counselling & Mental Health Team, subject to the following exceptions:

Counsellors require regular supervision of their work by an external, independent and experienced practitioner. Supervisors are also bound by the same or a similar code of ethics as counsellors in terms of confidentiality.
Where we have your express written consent to disclose information or data for a specified reason or purpose.
Where we would be liable to civil or criminal court procedure if the information was not disclosed. This includes any act that could be perceived as contravening the Terrorism Act, Drug Trafficking Act or Money Laundering Regulations or if a Court of Law subpoenas our case notes.
Where in extreme circumstances and in the professional opinion of the Counselling Service, serious harm may come to you and / or others involved with you.
Consent to disclose information will be sought from you whenever possible.

Student Feedback:
"Had such a positive experience and am so grateful to have this resource for students."

What do you do with my information?

In accordance with professional practice, the Data Protection Act 2018, the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) EU 2016/679 and other relevant legislation, we store information about your engagement with the Counselling Service. This includes keeping brief, factual notes about the content of your regular counselling sessions. All records are held on a secure, confidential database. These records are kept for 6 years from your last point of contact with the Counselling Service.
We store your information securely and control who has access to it. We will not share any information outside of the exceptions stated in the counselling contract. We will only share such information as necessary, and where we are satisfied that the other organisation is entitled to receive it and will keep your information secure. System administrators outside of the Counselling & Mental Health Team will support the functioning and maintenance of the electronic systems as required. System administrators do not use your information in any way other than the task for which they have been contracted.
We may use some of the information you provide to the University to produce reports with statistical information about the services we deliver. These reports do not contain any personally identifying information but may include the 9 characteristics protected under the Equality Act 2010 - age, disability, gender reassignment, marriage & civil partnership, pregnancy & maternity, race, religion or belief, sex, sexual orientation.

Student Feedback:
"I would not hesitate to recommend the service to anyone, my six weeks were incredibly productive!"

I'm worried about a friend, what can I do?

Looking after yourself:
It is important to look after yourself and know your limits. Supporting people who are struggling can impact on your own mental health and wellbeing. If you need to, get help and support for yourself. You can access support via the Counselling & Mental Health drop-in: book a drop-in appointment.
You can also email the Counselling Service Counsellors@northampton.ac.uk, Mental Health Service MHA@northampton.ac.uk or telephone the Counselling & Mental Health Team on 01604 892253 with your concerns.

Supporting a friend:

You can encourage hope by offering to help your friend look for support if they'd like it. This could be different teams within UON or other mental health professionals, support groups, services, or free online resources.
If a friend is struggling it is important to recognise that your role is not to advise or provide care, but to listen and provide support that encourages them to access other support services. Support your friend to feel confident about seeking help, rather than do this for them.
You can encourage your friend to access support via the Counselling & Mental Health drop-in: book a drop-in appointment.
Student Minds have developed a comprehensive guide called Look After Your Mate which will help support you to look out for your friends, from starting a conversation to navigating the student journey.

If you are concerned about an immediate risk of harm, either to yourself or someone else, have a medical emergency or require a First Aider please phone 999. You can also telephone UON Security on 01604 892269.
If your friend requires urgent support in managing their mental health:

See what is available at Northamptonshire NHFT: https://www.nhft.nhs.uk/help
Encourage them to telephone their GP / Doctor.
Encourage them to telephone the out-of-hours NHS telephone number 111, where staff can direct them to a service best placed to meet their health needs.
Download the Need Help in a Crisis booklet and share it with them.
Encourage them to access a local crisis café: timetable.

Quick UON Links:

Student Information Desk
ASSIST Disability Support
International Student Support
Student Support & Advice Team
Sexual Violence Liaison Officers
Financial Guidance
Multifaith Chaplaincy
Personal Academic Tutors (PAT)
Academic Support
Residential Life Team
Campus Police

Security
Students Union

Student Feedback:
"I really learnt a lot during the counselling sessions. I would definitely recommend the sessions to my friends."

Are Counselling and Mental Health Services different?

Counselling Service:

Counselling is a talking therapy that provides a safe and confidential space for you to talk to a trained professional (counsellor or therapist) about any issues and concerns.
Sometimes it can be helpful to have someone independent to listen and support, to help you make sense of your situation and find your own answers. Counselling can give you an opportunity to explore, discover and clarify ways of living more resourcefully with a greater sense of fulfilment.
Counselling is a common service that many people will use throughout their lives, not just those with a formally diagnosed mental illness.

Mental Health Service:

The Mental Health Service provides confidential support to students who are experiencing mental health difficulties.
They offer up to 6 sessions after an initial assessment appointment. This can be more if you have DSA Specialist Mentoring awarded to UON.
You can discuss in confidence any worries, concerns or requirements relating to your mental health difficulty and how this may affect your learning and progression.
They specialise in assessing how a mental health difficulty may affect your ability to learn, can recommend adjustments to enable study and progression and will work with you to find effective coping strategies to help overcome mental health difficulties.
This service complements NHS mental health services and does not replace them.

Email: MHA@northampton.ac.uk (Usual response is within 2 working days, Mon-Fri).
Telephone: 01604 892253 (Mon-Fri 9-5, voicemail outside of these times)

Student Feedback:
"For the past four years I have used and attended the counselling and mental health support services provided by the University of Northampton. There has been nothing but unconditional support, compassion and a high level of professionalism from all who work there. I would like to say a big thank you to the team."

What is the difference between Counselling and Drop-in appointments?

Counselling Service:

Counselling is a talking therapy that provides a safe and confidential space for you to talk to a trained professional (counsellor or therapist) about any issues and concerns.
Sometimes it can be helpful to have someone independent to listen and support, to help you make sense of your situation and find your own answers. Counselling can give you an opportunity to explore, discover and clarify ways of living more resourcefully with a greater sense of fulfilment.
Counselling is a common service that many people will use throughout their lives, not just those with a formally diagnosed mental illness.

Counselling & Mental Health Team Drop-ins:

We offer drop-in sessions Monday – Friday which last for up to 20 minutes.
Drop-in appointments are by telephone, so you can access our services remotely. However, if you prefer a face-to-face appointment then book a Tuesday slot and email mha@northampton.ac.uk to let us know you would like to attend in person.
All drop-in slots will become available for the week ahead from end of day every Friday.
These appointments provide you with an opportunity to talk with a member of the Counselling & Mental Health Team if something is urgent, if you are experiencing emotional or mental health distress, or you are unsure if the Counselling Service or Mental Health Service best suit your needs.
We will listen and support you in making sense of your situation and a way forward. We can also share information about other local and national services and self-help resources.
You will need to ensure you are registered with a Doctor's Surgery before you book an appointment. You can register with the Health Centre at Waterside Campus, Moulton Surgery OR with a Doctor closer to home: https://www.nhs.uk/service-search/find-a-gp.
You can book an appointment via the Counselling & Mental Health drop-in link: book a drop-in appointment.

Student Feedback:
"I accessed the drop-in service a couple of times before deciding to request counselling and this has all helped me get to the end of my course. I was very impressed with the drop-in service; both the ease of getting an appointment and the quality of interaction."

Do I have to have all six sessions of counselling?

No, the counselling sessions are yours to use as you need to.
If you don't want to have all six sessions, please talk this through with your Counsellor so you can decide together how to end your sessions.

Student Feedback:
"My counsellor helped me more in 4 sessions than anyone else I have seen over the last 6/7 years. They made me feel very comfortable and I can't recommend them enough."

What do I do if I need help now or I'm in crisis?

Please be aware that the Counselling & Mental Health Team does not offer crisis intervention. This is provided by the local National Health Service (NHS).

If you are concerned about an immediate risk of harm, either to yourself or someone else, have a medical emergency or require a First Aider please phone 999. You can also telephone UON Security on 01604 892269.
If you require urgent support in managing your mental health:

See what is available at Northamptonshire NHFT: https://www.nhft.nhs.uk/help
Telephone your GP / Doctor.
Telephone the out-of-hours NHS telephone number 111, where staff can direct you to a service best placed to meet your health needs.
Download the Need Help in a Crisis booklet.
Access a local crisis café: timetable.

Student Feedback:
"So helpful to address significant trauma and mental health issues. Saved me from darkness, thank you."

How do I balance attending lectures, placements and counselling?

If your course involves a placement, you may be encountering practical