2025 blogs:
Gichuru RyanUse SHIFT+ENTER to open the menu (new window).Open Menu SettingsUse SHIFT+ENTER to open the menu (new window). Help
Focus on Content

Menu
Mental Health and Wellbeing Blog 2025
​Mental Health and Wellbeing blog posts for 2025.

Most Recent Blog Post:
Tuesday 25 February 2025.
University Mental Health Day Save the Date: Thursday 13 March 2025.

On Thursday 13 March we will be celebrating University Mental Health Day. Join us on the ground floor of the Learning Hub, alongside other university teams, Northampton and midlands organisations for the 18th anniversary of University Mental Health Day at UON!

University Mental Health Day is a time to come together to continue talking about our mental health, seek support and develop skills.

Keep an eye on the screens around campus, event pages and student newsletters to hear more the activities taking place throughout the day. 

 February 2025
Thursday 20 February 2025.
Eating Disorder Awareness Week - February 24 to March 2.

Eating Disorders can be hard to spot – you may not always be able to “see” one, and the signs can be very different in each individual.

Eating Disorders can impact anybody, no matter their age, gender or background.

Help is available if you feel you may have an eating disorder via this article: Do I have an eating disorder(https://www.beateatingdisorders.org.uk/get-information-and-support/about-eating-disorders/do-i-have-an-eating-disorder/)?

If you are currently supporting or concerned about someone who may have an eating disorder, find out how you can help them while keeping care of yourself(https://www.beateatingdisorders.org.uk/get-information-and-support/support-someone-else/tips-for-supporting-somebody-with-an-eating-disorder/).

Tuesday 11 February 2025.
Space2Talk - Join Our Free Monthly Walk & Talk Sessions! 

Are you a student looking for a safe space to talk, connect, and improve your mental wellbeing? 

Our free monthly walks offer a supportive and friendly environment where you can share, interact, and get the support you need. 

✔ Boost your mental health 

✔ Meet new people 

✔ Enjoy fresh air & gentle exercise 

✔ Support & interaction in a safe space 

📍 Northampton | 🗓️ Once a month | 

💬 Open to all students 

For more details or to join, email us at info@space-wellbeing.co.uk. Let’s walk together for better wellbeing! 

To book on this FREE WALK(https://www.trybooking.com/uk/EJCE).



 January 2025
Tuesday 28 January 2025.
Action for Happiness.

Action for Happiness is a wellbeing global initiative that focuses on small everyday steps we can all take to improving our wellbeing from taking care of our body, living mindfully, learning new things or being comfortable with who we are.

Backed by research, Action for Happiness provides you with the tools you need, free of charge, whether you would like to reflect, set goals or join a local community.

You can learn more using their 10 keys for wellbeing, sign up for a 10 day course or webinars through their webpage(https://actionforhappiness.org/10-keys).

February will be looking at Connecting with Others as part of Friendly February. A monthly calendar(https://actionforhappiness.org/calendar) with daily tasks is available to download in over 20 languages.

Action for Happiness are also running an in person group "The Peaceful Pause”(https://actionforhappiness.org/groups/northampton-peaceful-pause-person), at UON Innovation Centre (opposite the train station). Available for anyone to attend, the 90 minute session will take place once a month and gives the chance to meet others, explore the 10 keys for wellbeing and learn how to take action.



Thursday 23 January 2025.
Achieve Your Best Webinars.

There is still time to sign up to attend Nathan Ghann's "Achieve Your Best" webinars on Wednesday 29 January.

Nathan will share his tips following his own journey where he achieved a first-class degree and started a PhD after passing two GCSEs.

The webinar will take place twice throughout the day. The afternoon session will begin at 1pm or the evening session takes place from 7pm, online.

Sign up to the afternoon session(https://us06web.zoom.us/meeting/register/tZEtc-yurDoiHdfm-JwO2Ho7Omqx1h_OT07J).

Sign up to the evening session(https://us06web.zoom.us/meeting/register/tZcrd-6gqDkoH9Z7cScuKUgKtbmTTRUK2ADM).



Monday 13 January 2025.

Beat Eating Disorder Support - The UK's Eating Disorder Charity - Beat(https://www.beateatingdisorders.org.uk/)


Beat helplines continue to run between 3pm-8pm, Monday to Friday. Support is available via phone, email, and webchat. Beat provides help for people of any age, whether you would like support or information about eating disorders, free to call from any phone.

Beat Helplines:

England: 0808 801 0677

Scotland: 0808 801 0432

Wales: 0808 801 0433

Northern Ireland: 080 801 0434

Amelie has shared her personal experience online, explaining her journey, and the difficulties that she faced alongside the support that Beat were able to offer.

Read her story(https://www.beateatingdisorders.org.uk/helplineappeal/).



 
2024 blogs:
public website
Student Hub
Search...
Search
  
Gichuru RyanUse SHIFT+ENTER to open the menu (new window).Open Menu SettingsUse SHIFT+ENTER to open the menu (new window). Help
Focus on Content

Menu
Mental Health and Wellbeing Blog 2024
Mental Health and Wellbeing blog posts for 2024

New year, new blog. View our Mental Health and Wellbeing Blog Posts 2025(https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Pages/mental-health-and-wellbeing-blog-2025.aspx). 

 December 2024.
Tuesday 17 December 2024
Mental Health support over the festive period.

As the semester end approaches, please be aware that the majority of University teams will break for Christmas and the New Year from Friday 20 December.

During this time, drop-ins with our Counselling and Mental team will not run until Thursday 2 January.

If you need support, you can contact Spectrum Life(https://universityofnorthampton.spectrum.life/login) for a free, 24/7 Student Support Programme. Use the Organisation Code: UONWELL

UK Freephone: 0800 031 8227
IRE Freephone: 1800 903 542
WhatsApp: Text 'Hi' to 07418 360 780
To find the Urgent Mental Health Services in your local area, please use this NHS link(https://www.nhs.uk/nhs-services/mental-health-services/where-to-get-urgent-help-for-mental-health/). 


Monday 16 December 2024
Introducing Counsellors' Corner

This year the Counselling Service has put together the Counsellors' Corner: A monthly online resource for staff and students to develop skills and pause throughout the day.

Each month will have a different theme and appear in UNify and Student Newsletters. You can access previous editions any time using the Student Hub Link(https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Pages/Counsellors-Corner.aspx).

So far this academic year, we have been giving tips on how to navigate life changes and transitions, loneliness, and family relationships.

In the new year, we'll be covering themes such as stress, anxiety, and low mood.



 November 2024.
Monday 25 November 2024
Northampton Lowdown Cafés

Lowdown have launched a wellbeing and crisis café for young people ages 19-25 years old to access mental health support. Open Mondays - Friday between 4 - 8pm, including bank holidays and Christmas you can access the café face to face, book a telephone appointment or ring the mobile number on the day.

The Café has skilled mental health workers and practitioners to speak with and is a great way to seek advice or share worries. Check out Lowdown's webpages(https://thelowdown.info/) for more information or connect with them on Instagram(https://www.instagram.com/thelowdownnn1/). 

Lowdown also run a volunteer Youth Advisory Board for 18-25 year olds to be part of developing the service and mental health support in the local community. Find out more how you can volunteer for them on their website(https://thelowdown.info/volunteer-with-us/).


Tuesday 19 November 2024
BEAT- support for eating disorders.

In October's newsletter, BEAT shared that calls to their helpline from or for university aged students has doubled. In response, BEAT are working to raise awareness of the challenges students with eating disorders face. Read the Sky report(https://news.sky.com/story/number-of-students-needing-support-for-eating-disorders-doubles-in-five-years-13224199) to learn more.

As we approach the festive period and end of 2024, BEAT are also hosting a new online workshop titled "Coping with Celebrations" on Saturday 23 November at 10am. To find out more or secure your tickets visit the webpage: Coping with Celebrations 2024 Booking Survey - Beat(https://training.beateatingdisorders.org.uk/page/153703/survey/1?utm_medium=email&utm_source=engagingnetworks&utm_campaign=october_2024_newsletter&utm_content=October+2024+Newsletter+-+Core&ea.url.id=7550067&forwarded=true)

If you would like to learn more about support available for those with eating disorders, the UON Counselling & Mental Health Team have self-help resources on the Student Hub(https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Pages/eating-problems-and-eating-disorders.aspx).

 October 2024.
Tuesday 8 October 2024.
Life as a Black Student.

Student Space have created brand new contact, working with a group of 8 students and experts with lived experience to bring a series showing Life as a black student at Universities(https://studentspace.org.uk/wellbeing/life-as-a-black-student).

This series provides different viewpoints through videos and articles covering topics such as family and community, navigating university life, understanding academic pressure and positive affirmations.

Alongside this series, a 4 part podcast series has been launched and is available to listen online(https://studentspace.org.uk/wellbeing/life-as-a-black-student-podcast-introduction). 

Friday 25 October 2024
Introducing Spectrum.Life

This October the University has joined up with Spectrum.Life to offer additional support to all students during your time studying with us.

This platform provides 24/7 access to a range of health and wellbeing resources, including:

Access to 24/7 Mental Health Support: Access to counsellors and mental health professionals via phone or WhatsApp, in over 200 languages;
Physical Health Resources: Fitness plans, workout guides, and advice on maintaining a healthy lifestyle;
Wellbeing Webinars & Workshops: Educational sessions on stress management, mindfulness, nutrition, and more.
To access this resource, sign up or get in contact using the following details:

universityofnorthampton.spectrum.life using Organisational Code UONWELL.
UK Freephone : 0800 031 8227
WhatsApp: Text 'Hi' to 074 1836 0780
Spectrum.Life is additional to the current support available within the University of Northampton Student Support team, including the Counselling and Mental Health teams. This can be used whilst waiting for appointments, outside of University working hours or for general wellbeing tips.  

 September 2024.
Tuesday 17 September 2024.
New (Academic) Year = Healthy Habits

Getting ready for the new academic year may seem scary. It's a great time to start building healthy habits and putting in some extra work now can help the rest of the year run smoothly.

Getting organised and on top of your academic skills can help you throughout your course. The Library team(https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Pages/Academic-support.aspx) have various tutorials and guidance on their website for you to develop skills before your assessments. 

If things don't go to plan or if you are finding the transition to university difficult, you my wish to book a drop-in with a member of the Counselling and Mental Health Team(
https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Pages/appointments-and-drop-ins.aspx). 

Please note that we have recently suggested accessing support via TogetherAll. This service is no longer available.

The following support is still available to you:

UON Counselling and Mental health team resources
Tuesday 3 September 2024.
Shout has now been launched in Northamptonshire.  

From today, anyone in the area can text the word 'IMATTER' to 85258 to be connected to a trained Shout Volunteer. 

Support is available via text 24/7 and can help if you are experiencing anxiety, stress, lonliness, depression or suicidal thoughts.

A trained Shout Volunteer will help you via text message to plan ahead in a calmer state and can support you in looking at other Northamptonshire services.

Shout is free, confidential and anonymous support and will not appear on phone bills. All messages are confidential unless there is a concern for your safety.

 For more resources, please visit: giveusashout.org/get-help/resources.

If you are in need of urgent support or are at risk, please call 999 or the 24/7 NHS Mental Health Hub number on – 0800 448 0828

 August 2024
Monday 19 August 2024.
The University will be closed after Friday 23 August to Tuesday 27 August due to the bank holiday.

This means any emails received during this time will not be responded to. The team will be working at a reduced service between Wednesday 28 August to Friday 30 August which may lead to a slower response. We will respond to any queries as soon as possible.

During this time, the following information may be of interest to you:

UON Counselling and Mental health team resources: Counselling & Mental Health Team Webpage(https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Pages/counselling-and-mental-health.aspx)
Togetherall is a safe, online community where people support each other anonymously to improve mental health and wellbeing and you can register by;
https://togetherall.com
Click on Register
Click on I'm from a University or College
Sign up with your Northampton email address
Student space: Home (studentspace.org.uk)
Student Space have collected a series of support especially for this time: https://studentspace.org.uk/wellbeing/summer-break which includes making the most of this time, understanding student finance and friendship difficulties.

Student Minds(https://www.studentminds.org.uk/) - Home – link to resources: Resources - Student Minds(https://www.studentminds.org.uk/resources.html)
You can also access support via the 24/7 NHS Mental Health Hub number on 0800 448 0828

 July 2024
21 July 2024.
Support is still here

As the academic year has drawn to a close, you may be feeling a little lost. Support is still available at both the University and in the community.

Counselling and Mental Health continue to offer drop-ins throughout the term with two sessions being available Monday to Friday. If you would like to book a drop-in, please visit our webpage(https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Pages/appointments-and-drop-ins.aspx). 

If you are staying in Northampton, you can access support via the NHS Crisis Café's and Urgent Help Teams(https://www.nhft.nhs.uk/help).

If you are under 25 years old or a parent, you may wish to look at the support available from Lowdown(https://thelowdown.info/). 

Support is available if you are outside of Northampton. Our drop-in service is available via telephone and we only ask that you are in a private space and have a registered GP to access these sessions.

You can find out information about your local NHS teams and find information about the Mental Health Hub Number local to you by the NHS website: Check your mental health symptoms - NHS 111(https://111.nhs.uk/triage/check-your-mental-health-symptoms).

 June 2024.
4 June 2024.
Preparing for the Summer Semester

As we move towards the end of the September to July academic year, you may be thinking about your next steps.

Student Space(https://studentspace.org.uk/wellbeing/final-term) from Student Minds have put together a resource of tips and advice on preparing for the summer, including moving accommodation, reviewing your year so far, motivation and healthy habits for the summer period.

Check out the Student Space website(https://studentspace.org.uk/wellbeing/final-term) for more information.

 May 2024.
13 May 2024.
Mental Health Awareness Week - Moving more for our mental health

 During this year's Mental Health Awareness Week we are all being encouraged to move more for our mental health. This could be anything from having a walk in the fresh air, a dance around the kitchen or joining a new sports group.

Movement has great benefits for our health - both physical and mental but it can be difficult to find an activity that you enjoy and feel able to do.

Visit the university webpage to find different ways you can be more active whilst on campus(https://www.northampton.ac.uk/about-us/services-and-facilities/sport-at-uon/active-campus/) or come along to our very own running group, Threads, every Wednesday from 4pm outside the Waterside Restaurant.

Each week Counselling and Mental Health host daily drop-in sessions'. If you feel you need support or would like to speak to a member of the team, find out more on the Student Hub Page.



Join us to cut the waiting times of NHS mental health services.

Organised by St. Andrew's Healthcare and the University of Northampton
Time and location: Monday 13th May at 6.30pm in the Boardroom in the main building at St. Andrew's Healthcare, Billing Road, Northampton NN1 5DG.
We invite you to join a meeting to help us develop a new solution that will allow patients to access EMDR therapy much sooner and more often. EMDR Therapy is an effective therapy for the treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), anxiety and depression disorders. 

We will provide travel expenses (up to £10) and also a thank you shopping voucher of £20 to show our gratitude for your attending. Tea/coffee and refreshments will also be provided. 

The purpose of this meeting is to get a group of people together who may have undergone EMDR, or who may be suitable to undergo it in the future, and to demonstrate the technology to them and let them try it out. This will enable us to receive feedback and to get ideas on how we could potentially improve it. It will also allow us identify potential pitfalls or barriers that we may not have thought about that we can build into future trials of the product. Your thoughts and ideas will be invaluable to us moving forward. If the project receives funding, we hope that you will be able to join us on our steering group which will monitor the progress of the project and provide ongoing feedback. 

While we hope that you will be able to join us in person so we can show you the technology, there will also be the potential to join us remotely by teams – please let us know if that would be preferable. 

How to join: email Dr Mu Mu mu.mu@northampton.ac.uk or ring/message 07720843510 to register your interest and receive further information.

 April 2024.
29 April 2024.
Most Recent Blog Post:
Maternal Mental Health Awareness Week

Between the Monday 29 April and Sunday 5 May, we recognise maternal mental health awareness week, before, during and after pregnancy, arranged and supported by Maternal Mental health Alliance.

If you are struggling with your mental health as a parent whilst studying, we are available to support you. Book a drop-in session to speak with a member of the Counselling and Mental Health Team: https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Pages/appointments-and-drop-ins.aspx  

You may also want to connect with other Student Parents through the SU Society: https://northamptonunion.com/societies/activity/170/The-Society-for-Student-Parents

To find out more about Maternal Mental Health Awareness Week, visit the website:  https://maternalmentalhealthalliance.org/about-maternal-mental-health/maternal-mental-health-awareness-week/

19 April 2024.
Learn more about the Counselling and Mental Health Team.

The Counselling and Mental Health team offer daily drop-in sessions which run Monday - Friday during term time. These are a great opportunity to have a one-off chat with a member of the team, learn about the support available or have a check-in at a difficult time.

Alongside drop-in's you can also get involved in some of the groups that take place:

Threads: Weekly Running Group

Meet outside Waterside Restaurant every Wednesday at 4pm for a 20-30minute run. All abilities welcome, headphones or conversation optional.
Manspace: a place for men to come and talk.

Taking place on the first Wednesday of every month, pop to The Hide (4th Floor) of the Learning Hub between 2-3pm to meet peers and talk in a safe environment.
Creative Visualisation Meditation

Taking place on the last Wednesday of every month, visit the Multi-Faith Centre between 2-3pm to take part in mindful exercises and let your mind wander from stress.
To learn more about our Wellbeing events taking place visit our Student Hub page: https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Pages/wellbeing-events.aspx

15 April 2024.
April is Stress Awareness Month

April is Stress Awareness Month. A time to bring attention to the importance of managing stress and life's challenges.

It is natural to experience stress and can help focus our attention in important situations. Too much stress can have a negative impact and become overwhelming.

Visit our self help student hub page to learn positive coping strategies and ways to manage stress, particularly during exam seasons.

 March 2024.
27 March 2024.
Mental Health Service support over the Spring Vacation

The University will be closed due to bank holiday and closed days between Friday 29 March and Tuesday 2 April.

During this time, the Counselling and Mental Health team will not be working and drop-in appointments are not available. Emails will be answered when staff return to work on the Wednesday 3 April. Please be mindful this may cause a delay in the response times.

Drop-ins are still available to book over the Spring Vacation, you can book your appointment on the Counselling and Mental Health pages(https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Pages/appointments-and-drop-ins.aspx). 

In an emergency situation, attend A&E or call 999.

If you are staying in Northampton, you can access the Northamptonshire Mental Health Hub 0800 448 0828, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Visit the NHS website(https://www.nhs.uk/service-search/mental-health/find-an-urgent-mental-health-helpline) to find information about your local helpline outside of Northampton. 

If you feel you need non-urgent support, contact your GP or Outside of GP hours, you can contact the out-of-hours NHS telephone number 111.

Self- help resources and information on support during a crisis can be found through the Student Hub links:

Counselling and Mental Health Team(https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Pages/counselling-and-mental-health.aspx)
Self Help Resources(https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Pages/self-help-resources.aspx)
Need Help in a Crisis(https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Downloads/need-help-in-a-crisis.pdf)
18 March 2024.
Neurodiversity Celebration Week - Monday 18 March to Sunday 24 March

We're proud to be supporting Neurodiversity Celebration Week 2024! 

Neurodiversity Celebration Week is a worldwide initiative that challenges stereotypes and misconceptions about neurological differences.

Together let's change the narrative to understand, accept, and celebrate neurodiversity! 

#NeurodiversityCelebrationWeek #NeurodiversityWeek #NCW #ThisIsND

If you would like to join some of the conversations taking part this week, visit: https://www.neurodiversityweek.com/events to view their schedule of events. 

11 March 2024.
R;pple Suicide Prevention.

Here at UON we are proud to introduce R;pple(https://www.ripplesuicideprevention.com/). R;pple recognises if someone searches for phrases related to self-harm or suicide, instead providing signposting to 24/7 free mental health support.

Visit the R;pple stand with IT on University Mental Health Day (Ground Floor, Learning Hub) to find out more.

If you or someone you know has been affected by suicide, you are not alone. Ask for help if you need it. Call Samaritans on 116 123, text Shout to 85258. 

Additional support for students can be accessed via the drop-in service with the Counselling & Mental Health Team and for staff via the Employee Assistance Programme (login required)[https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/staff/Pages/support-and-self-help.aspx].



 February 2024.
26 February 2024.
Eating Disorder Awareness Week: Monday 26 February to Friday 1 March 2024.

Throughout the week you may see more information on social media as teams work to raise awareness and reduce misunderstandings around eating disorders during this time.

To learn more about eating problems, eating disorders and the support available, visit the Self Help Pages on the Student Hub.

If you would like to speak with a member of the Counselling or Mental Health team, book one of the daily drop-in's to start your conversation.

19 February 2024.
Save the Date: University Mental Health Day, Thursday 14 March 2024

University Mental Health Day will be taking place on Thursday 14 March 2024.

Look out for further information around campus and through student communication to learn about the various activities planned, from workshops to stall holders.

The main event shall be taking place between 10am to 3pm on the ground floor of the Learning Hub. Hope to see you there!

13 February 2024.
February is LGBTQ+ History Month

LGBTQ+ History Month aims to raise awareness and reduce prejudice towards individuals from the community.

Within Counselling and Mental Health we are committed to supporting the University's Equality and Diversity Action plan. Disclosure around gender, sexuality, age, disability, race, religion or belief, pregnancy or maternity and other protected characteristics will be treated empathetically.

Learning and Library services have created an online reading list of books, articles, websites, podcasts, films and resources which are accessible to both staff and students. Whether you would like to learn more or want to celebrate diversity and representation in the media, visit the reading list(https://readinglists.northampton.ac.uk/leganto/readinglist/searchlists/1600084790007361?auth=SAML) to view the collection: 

To find out more about specialist services and communities that can support you or someone you care about, visit the Student Hub self-help pages(https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Pages/lgbtq.aspx).

1 February 2024.
It's #TimeToTalk

The 1st February is #TimeToTalk Day. A reminder that talking about mental health can help ourselves and others.

The theme for 2024 is "What I really mean" where we recognise how difficult it can be to share true feelings or how quickly we reply that "things are fine".

To find out more about #timetotalk or how you can get involved, visit the website: https://timetotalkday.co.uk/

If you would like to speak with a member of the Counselling or Mental Health team, book one of the daily drop-in's to start your conversation.

 January 2024.
29 January 2024.
Finding university challenging?

As exam and assignment deadlines pass and we return to university after the winter vacation, students often feel the start of this semester should be easier. In reality, this time of the academic year can bring up new challenges.

You may be finding it difficult within your friendship group, after receiving your first academic results of the year or being fed up with the cold and dark weather.

Student Minds have created a guide with tips and resources to help you through the "Second Term Blues" : Second term blues (studentspace.org.uk).

If you are worried about your academic progress as we move into Semester 2, the Student Support and Advice team are on hand to help with information available about their services and other support teams on the Student Hub.

Counselling and Mental Health continue to run daily drop-in's Monday to Friday with further information available on their pages. 

22 January 2024.
Feeling Good Northamptonshire

Download the Feeling Good App(https://www.feelinggood.app/download/) FREE until the end of March as part of a pilot project run by General Practice Alliance in Northamptonshire.

Feeling Good contains an evidence-based wellbeing programme which supports positive living using a set of 12 different exercises.

The app contains two different versions, one for teenagers between 13-18 year olds and one for 18+.

To learn more about the app and benefits visit the website: Feeling Good: Northamptonshire - General Practice Alliance (northantsgpalliance.com)

You can download the app using the following link: Download Feeling Good App – Feeling Good

The following code can be used for FREE access to the adult version:

Username: nthmtnf1
Password: positive
Please note: Once you have downloaded the app, you will be able to continue to access all resources for free. If you have not downloaded the app and signed in before the end of March, there may be a cost.

15 January 2024.
Feeling Blue?

The third Monday of January is known as Blue Monday, with many believing that it is a more challenging day as we enter the new year.

There doesn't appear to be any evidence to suggest that this Monday is more difficult than any other Monday or month. No matter when or what you are experiencing, support is available.

UON Counselling and Mental health team resources: Counselling & Mental Health Team Webpage and Self-Help Resources: Self-help Resources (sharepoint.com)
Togetherall is a safe, online community where people support each other anonymously to improve mental health and wellbeing and you can register by;
https://togetherall.com
Click on Register
Click on I'm from a University or College
Sign up with your Northampton email address
Student space: Home (studentspace.org.uk)
Student Minds - Home – link to resources: Resources - Student Minds.
8 January 2024.
Connect with Northamptonshire Mind.

Northamptonshire Mind have set up a brand new mental health service for individuals aged 18-30.

"Connect" provides a space for like-minded individuals to come together and access support for mental health.

When: Every Thursday, starting 11 January. Open Hub: 10am- 4pm with themed discussions between 2pm-3pm.

Where: Northampton Mind, 6-7 Regent Square, NN1 2NQ

Each week will have a different discussion topic:

Relationship Building and Healthy Relationships
Self Care
CV Writing and Job Searching
Nutrition and Wellbeing
For more information or to find out how to contact Northamptonshire Mind, visit their website.

6 January 2024.
Are you interested in reducing your alcohol intake?

Each year Alcohol Change UK launch Dry January(https://alcoholchange.org.uk/help-and-support/managing-your-drinking/dry-january) as a 31 day challenge to start the year. To find out more visit the website(https://alcoholchange.org.uk/help-and-support/managing-your-drinking/dry-january).

Dry January is not for everyone and there are other ways that you can become alcohol aware from taking part in alcohol free events or giving low or no alcohol drinks a try. Alcohol Change UK(https://alcoholchange.org.uk/help-and-support/get-help-now) share ideas and support links available for you or people you may know.

To learn more about the specialist support available whilst you are living in Northampton visit the West Northants webpage(https://www.westnorthants.gov.uk/stop-smoking-drug-and-alcohol-support/alcohol-addiction). 

The University of Northampton and Student Union are committed to a Harm Reduction Approach towards alcohol and drug use. To learn more visit the Student Union website(https://northamptonunion.com/News/Article/harm-reduction-approach).


​Get in Touch

When you email us, please include your name and student number

Email Us

Mental Health Advisers:
mha@northampton.ac.uk
Counsellors: counsellors@northampton.ac.uk
Postal Address

Counselling and Mental Health Team

Riverview Hub, Office 027

Waterside

University Drive

Northampton

NN1 5PH

Urgent help

Please be aware that the Counselling & Mental Health Team does not offer crisis intervention. This is provided by the local National Health Service. 

If you require urgent support in managing your mental health then see what is available at I need urgent help|NHFT or ring your doctor or the out-of-hours NHS telephone number 111, where staff can direct you to a service best placed to meet your health needs.

If you are at risk of harm, have a medical emergency or require a First Aider, contact Security on 01604 892269.

Useful information

Harassment reporting form


 
2023 blogs:
Mental Health and Wellbeing Blog 2023

Mental Health and Wellbeing blog posts for 2023
Most Recent Blog Post:
19 December 2023
Mental Health Service Support over the Winter Vacation
The university will be closed due to bank holiday and closed days between Friday 23 December to Tuesday 2 January.

During this time, the Counselling and Mental Health team will not be working and drop-in appointments are not available. Emails will be answered when staff return to work in January. Please be mindful this may cause a delay in the response times.

In an emergency situation, attend A&E or call 999.

If you are staying in Northampton, you can access the Northamptonshire Mental Health Hub 0800 448 0828, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Visit the NHS website to find information about your local helpline outside of Northampton: https://www.nhs.uk/service-search/mental-health/find-an-urgent-mental-health-helpline

If you feel you need non-urgent support, contact your GP or Outside of GP hours, you can contact the out-of-hours NHS telephone number 111.

Self- help resources and information on support during a crisis can be found through the Student Hub links:

Counselling and Mental Health: https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Pages/counselling-and-mental-health.aspx

Self Help Resources: https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Pages/self-help-resources.aspx
Need Help in a Crisis: https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Downloads/need-help-in-a-crisis.pdf

December 2023

5 December 2023
MIND Northampton support over the Christmas period.
MIND Northampton will continue support over the Christmas period with the Crisis Café and Mental Health phone line remaining open as usual.

Crisis Café's will be running at various different points throughout the week at 6/7 Regent Square, Northampton NN1 2NQ.

The NHFT phone line will be open 24hours a day, 7 days a week (including bank holidays) on phone number: 08004480828

For more information about these services and to check the Crisis Café timetable visit their website: https://www.northamptonshiremind.org.uk/crisis-support

If you wanted to get into the Christmas spirit pop along to Mind in Northampton on the 15th December for their Christmas Fayre and Alice in Wonderland tea party. More details can be found on their social media:

Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/NorthamptonshireMind
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/NorthamptonshireMind

Grief Awareness Week.

This week (2-8 December 2023) is National Grief Awareness Week - a time to recognise that we are #bettertogether.

To learn more about specialist UK services who can support with Loss and Bereavement visit the Student Hub page: https://mynorthamptonac.sharepoint.com/sites/student/Pages/loss-and-bereavement.aspx

November 2023
29 November 2023
Mental Health Foundation: Help us change how people see mental health and win up to £600.
Our research has shown that people often feel like that they can't relate to the images that the media use when they talk about the things that can help our mental health. With your help, we want to change that.
We're creating a freely-available library of images that represent real people looking after their mental health, and we're welcoming submissions from professional and amateur photographers.

Find out more on the Mental Health Foundation website.

20 November 2023
Togetherall: 24/7 support over the Christmas period.

This holiday season, Togetherall are sharing valuable insights on coping strategies, courtesy of their Chief Clinical Officer, Dr. Ben Locke, PhD.

Explore their user-friendly digital assets, thoughtfully designed to make your holiday experience more resilient and enjoyable.

Find out more on the Togetherall website.
7 November 2023
Mental Health Awareness Course

Mental Health First Aid Awareness Course where you can learn the following:

Meaning of mental health
Overview of common disorders

How to support others

Free sessions available on Monday 20 November and Friday 24 November 2023.

For more information contact Learn2b@northnorthants.gov.uk.

7 November 2023
Creative Visualisation Group: Next session taking place Wednesday 29 November 2023.
Take a relaxing and mindful pause: Creative Visualisation Meditation combines the practice of meditation with visualisations.
It can help with managing stress, anxiety, trauma and depression.
It also fosters mental clarity, inner peace and a positive outlook on life.

This event runs monthly, the next session takes place on Wednesday 29 November at 2pm.

For more information contact Annalisa.Fraddosio2@northampton.ac.uk.

3 November 2023
Campaign Against Living Miserably: Calm Guides
These CALM Guides cover a lot of issues that can leave you feeling down or like you've hit a wall.

The guides are not here to tell you what to do, just give you some friendly, practical information that can help you understand these challenges and how to find help and move forward.

Find out more on the CALM website.

October 2023

20 October 2023
Manspace: a place for men to come and talk

From childhood, boys are told to keep quiet, and that men don't talk to each other,
We are here to challenge this stereotype.

The Hide @ Learning Hub , first Wednesday of the month 2-4pm

Free tea and coffee.
Vintage games consoles.
Lego.
Art activities.
Occasional guest speakers

Danny Davidson, student counsellor.
For more information, please email: danny.davidson@northampton.ac.uk.

19 October 2023
PAPYRUS prevention of young suicide

PAPYRUS Prevention of Young Suicide is the UK charity dedicated to the prevention of suicide and the promotion of positive mental health and emotional wellbeing in young people. We believe that no young person should have to struggle alone with thoughts of suicide.

Contact PAPYRUS Prevention of Young Suicide

2 October 2023
Free Monthly Creative Visualisation Meditation Group
Last Wednesday of the month, 2pm Multi-Faith Centre, University of Northampton
Creative Visualisation Meditation combines the practice of meditation with visualisations. It can help with managing stress, anxiety, trauma and depression. It fosters mental clarity, inner peace and a positive outlook on life. We will also use crystals, positive affirmation cards and music.

Annalisa.Fraddosio2@northampton.ac.uk

September 2023

19 September 2023
Student Minds/Student Volunteering
Campaign for a cause you care about, improve understanding of mental health difficulties, run a peer support group…whatever you want to do, take action today and be part of a growing movement to transform the state of student mental health.
Check out options viable at Student Minds inc Advisory Committee, Writing, Peer Support, Fundraising, etc https://www.studentminds.org.uk/studentvolunteering.html
11 September 2023
Take A Break

As Part of Suicide Awareness Day come and Join on the sofa for a chat. The ‘Take a Break’ campaign aims to tackle this by providing a relaxed environment for people to chat, share any concerns they have, and find out how to get help.

Sat 16th Sept: Becketts Park 12-2pm
Sun 17th Sept: Great Northampton Run ( Market Square) 08.30 – 12 noon

Check https://www.nhft.nhs.uk/suicide-prevention

August 2023

24 August 2023
Student Minds new 10 year strategy

We have a clear vision: No student should be held back by their mental health.

Our mission is to improve university communities so that every student gets the mental health support they need to reach their goals.

At Student Minds, we're a charity improving university communities. Around one in four students report having a diagnosed mental health issue while at university, and world events, navigating identity and discrimination can make student life even tougher.

We've already made great strides in creating change but there is more to do and we're energised to do it. Over the next ten years, we commit to:

Continue driving positive change for students - we'll keep working with students, the higher education sector, health sector and government to make student mental health a priority, and we'll continue empowering students to look after their own mental health.
Ensuring that positive change lasts - we'll focus on preventative, sustainable, long-term changes that will benefit future generations as well as the students of today.

Read the strategy on studentminds.org.uk
15 August 2023
LGBT+ Support

We understand that it may feel difficult to find support. Many young people feel isolated and disconnected from social circles or even families and we want you to know that you are not alone.

the lowdown's LGBTQ+ Support Service runs youth groups and events for young people up to the age of 25. We offer a safe, non-judgemental and confidential space for you to attend as and when you like. It is a space designed so that you are able to explore who you are, to socialise, meet new friends, talk though difficulties with others who understand, whilst also having fun and joining in with activities.

Out There Plus group meets every friday 7pm-9pm. For any young person aged between 18 and 25 who identifies as LGBTQ+. The aim of this group is to provide young people with a safe and relaxing environment to explore their identity and socialise with other LGBTQ+ people. For information on how to join, contact us on 07585 737482 or email lgbtqsupport@thelowdownnorthampton.co.uk.

9 August 2023
MIND Northamptonshire - Groups & Peer Support

Northamptonshire Mind offers a variety of informal support groups that cater to diverse interests, from creative arts to outdoor activities. These groups provide an opportunity for individuals seeking mental health support to connect with like-minded individuals while participating in activities that foster personal growth and skill development.

https://www.northamptonshiremind.org.uk/group-work-and-peer-support

4 August 2023
How to do 7 - 11 breathing.

This breathing exercise can help you to reduce stress in the moment.

If you practice it regularly, you may also find that it helps you feel calmer generally. The more you practice, the more effective this technique becomes.

Feeling stressed
Struggling with panic attacks
Having difficulty sleeping
Having difficulty concentrating
Feeling agitated or anxious

Struggling to manage your emotions

https://studentspace.org.uk/wellbeing/7-11-breathing-exercise

July 2023

24 July 2023
PAPYRUS is the national charity dedicated to the prevention of young suicide.
PAPYRUS was founded in 1997 by a group of bereaved parents, who had each lost children to suicide. Our founding parents shared core beliefs that suicide is preventable, and that those of us with lived experience of suicide have a valuable and unique contribution to make to the wider conversation around suicide.
It provides confidential support and advice to young people struggling with thoughts of suicide, and anyone worried about a young person through our helpline, 0800 068 41 41.

https://www.papyrus-uk.org/papyrus-HOPELINE247/

June 2023
29 June 2023
The UK’s student mental health charity.
We empower students and members of the university community to look after their own mental health, support others and create change.
Together we will transform the state of student mental health so that all in higher education can thrive. Find out more about what we do on the Student Minds website.
13 June 2023
Supporting someone else with their mental health
We all go through tough times, and people help us through them. Other times we worry about other people's mental health.
Whether they are a friend, family member or colleague, there are many ways to support somebody you care about.
Through their research-based mental health information and advice, and ongoing programmes and policy work, Mental Health Foundation want to help people look after their mental health, prevent more serious problems from developing and help everyone live mentally healthy lives.

https://www.mentalhealth.org.uk/explore-mental-health/supporting-someone-else-their-mental-health

7 June 2023
NHS Northamptonshire Talking Therapies
Feeling lethargic, unmotivated, not feeling like your usual self? Could you benefit from support by talking to someone or through online programmes working at your own pace?
NHS Northamptonshire Talking Therapies works with people across Northamptonshire who are trying to get back on track, although they may feel stressed, low or anxious.

https://www.nhft.nhs.uk/talkingtherapies/

May 2023
24 May 2023
The Mental Health Number: 0800 4480828
For local support and services give one of our mental health navigators a call, anytime of the day or night.

0800 448 0828 - Lines available 24 hours a day, seven days a week

NHFT and the mental health charity, Mind, have bought a 24/7 mental health support number for the people of Northamptonshire.
The mental health number has been designed to be the only number you need to call for mental health support in the county. When an individual calls, a trained member of staff will find the right support for the person, whether this is from the NHS; the voluntary and community sector; or advice over the telephone.

https://www.nhft.nhs.uk/mentalhealth-number/

16 May 2023
Mental Health Awareness Week runs from 15 - 21 May 2023. This year, the theme is anxiety.
"I think I have an eating disorder"
Saying those words for the first time can be anxiety inducing.
Thousands go without treatment for fear of how it might look, how people will react, and what will happen next.
But with BEAT (Eating Disorders) online resources, Helpline, support groups, and training programmes, they're here to make sure everyone gets the help they deserve.

15 May 2023
Uncertain times: Anxiety in the UK and how to tackle it
The Mental Health Foundation (MHF) has chosen anxiety as their Mental Health Awareness Week 2023 theme to provide a better understanding of what anxiety is, when it becomes a concern, and what we can do to help ourselves and each other when anxiety starts to become a problem.
Read MHF's report on Anxiety in the UK to find out more.
11 May 2023
Mental Health Foundation
Anxiety is a normal emotion in us all, but sometimes it can get out of control and become a mental health problem.
Anxiety is one of the most common mental health problems we can face. In a recent mental health survey we carried out around stress, anxiety and hopelessness over personal finances, a quarter of adults said they felt so anxious that it stopped them from doing the things they want to do some or all of the time. Six in ten adults feel this way, at least some of the time. On a positive note, anxiety can be made easier to manage.Visit the mentalhealth.org.uk website for MH Awareness Week sources.

April 2023
18 April 2023
MIND; What mental health support can I get while studying?
There are many different individuals and organisations who can offer you mental health support. If possible, put this support in place when things are going well.
It could make it easier to ask for help if you start to find things more difficult. Try thinking about who you feel comfortable talking to. You might want support from:

Your place of study
Outside of your place of study
Friends and family
Online mental health support

Visit: https://www.mind.org.uk/information-support/tips-for-everyday-living/student-life/support-and-treatment/

4 April 2023
Student Minds - The Wellbeing Thesis
You should not have to sacrifice your health to complete your research.

The Wellbeing Thesis is an all-inclusive informational website to support your through your postgraduate research journey.
The website provides information to improve your mental health and help you navigate the ups and downs of your postgraduate research. The Wellbeing Thesis can help you to:

Set yourself up to do the best
Challenge common postgraduate myths
Feel in control of your postgraduate journey
Plan on the next steps following on from your studies
And much more.

March 2023
29 March 2023
Zimwomen Northampton
Zimwomen Northampton is a voluntary organisation based in Northampton UK.
The aim of the organisation is to empower and support vulnerable women, young people and children for a better today and tomorrow. To improve and enhance the lives of vulnerable women, young people and children living in Northamptonshire. Particular focus on education and re-employment, health and personal well-being by providing training, skills nurturing and development and through sports and recreational activities. Visit their website: http://www.zimwomenassociation.org/

22 March 2023
CALM's Guide to looking out for a mate.
What does it mean to be a good mate?

What you need to know
You're already a good mate
Keep an eye out
Check in with their other mates
Go ahead and ask
Give them something to smile about
Don't shy away from the S word
Sometimes it's easier to talk to a strange

Maybe it's turning up at a friend's door with a takeaway after a busy day, sending a meme you know they'll find funny, or being there when they're struggling. It can be hard to know when someone you care about is finding things tough and even harder to know what to say. Visit the website: https://www.thecalmzone.net/guides/worried-about-someone#what-you-need-to-know

13 March 2023
Contact Details for Support Groups:LocalDostiyo Asian Women and Girls Organisation

info@dostiyo.org.uk
www.dostiyo.co.uk

Pearls of Peace - women's community and development group

pearlsofpeace@hotmail.co.uk
www.pearlsofpeace.co.uk

Sikh Community Centre & Youth Club

info@sccyc.co.uk

Northamptonshire Race & Equality Council

info@northamptonshirerec.org.uk
www.northantsrec.org

Northampton Bangladeshi Association<br>

nba_bangla@hotmail.com
www.nbagateway.co.uk

Indian Hindu Welfare Organisation (Northampton)

www.ihwo.org.uk/about-us/background/

Northamptonshire Sikhs

www.northamptonsikhs.org/sccyc

United African Association (UAA)
uafricanassociation@gmail.com
www.uaassociation.org

NationwideThe Black, African and Asian Therapy Network (UK Wide)

www.baatn.org.uk

SidetoSide - MIND's community platform
https://sidebyside.mind.org.uk/

National Indian Students and Alumni Union UK
www.nisau.org.uk

Indian National Students Association (INSA)
www.insauk.org

Student Space - have a variety of online support groups including support for Muslim and Punjabi students
https://studentspace.org.uk/

February 2023
28 February 2023
University Mental Health Day - Thursday 9 March 2023

University Mental Health Day (UMHD) is a national event with the aim of bringing the Higher Education community together by raising awareness of the support available to both staff and students, promoting culture change, and encouraging conversations about mental health. We have been running events at UON on this day since its inception in 2008, so this year is our 15th Anniversary!
This year, we have 35 stands of service providers who are keen to meet and share information with our staff and students.

21 February 2023
UMHAN: University Mental Health Advisers Network

UMHAN encourages you to think about your rights, resources and broad support networks, and these webpages will help inform you about these.
If you're a student with a mental health condition, you know someone who is, or you want to raise awareness, you may find the UMHAN website useful.
Do you know who to talk to about issues relating to your mental health and study?
Are you aware of your entitlements as a student with a mental health condition? Have you looked at the self help resources that are available?

6 February 2023
Student Minds
Student Minds is the UK's student mental health charity.
We empower students and members of the university community to look after their own mental health, support others and create change.
Together we will transform the state of student mental health so that all in higher education can thrive. Find out more about what we do on the Student Minds website.

January 2023
25 January 2023
Pearls of Peace
Pearls of Peace is a women's community and development group which was established in 2009 and is run by a group of dedicated Muslim ladies.
We hold inclusive events to break down existing barriers, build bridges within the community and encourage positive communication and community cohesion.
Find out more on the Pearls of Peace website.

24 January 2023
Let your mind wander from stress

Free Creative Visualisation Meditation
First session starts Wednesday 25 January 2023!
Last Wednesday of the month at 2pm, Quiet Room, Multifaith Centre, Waterside.
Creative Visualisation Meditation combines the practice of meditation with visualisations.
It can help with managing stress, anxiety, trauma and depression. It fosters mental clarity, inner peace and a positive outlook on life. We will also use crystals, positive affirmation cards and music.
First come first serve basis with a maximum of 10 participants.
Open to all students.
Contact: annalisa.fraddosio@northampton.ac.uk

17 January 2023
Campaign Against Living Miserably
You don’t have to be alone to feel alone. Whatever you’re going through, let’s tackle it together.
The Calmzone have teamed up with CALM ambassador Declan Rice to show that whatever you’re struggling with, someone is always on your side. Read more on Calmzone website.

10 January 2023
United African Association (UAA)

About Us
United African Association is a registered charity based in Northampton. The organisation was formed to advise, support, advocate, and represent organisations and individuals within the African community.

Activities and Events
African food bank

Saturday's 11am - 12.30pm
Food parcels for eligible residents at Leicester Street Community Room, NN1 3RS.

African drumming sessions

Thursdays 6.30om - 9pm
Free African drumming sessions at Leicester Street Community Room, NN1 3RS.

Basic Computer Training

Thursdays 10am - 12pm
12-week computing course for beginners. £1 per session at United African Association, 1st floor, Barratt House, NN2 6EZ

Health awareness sessions
Community Support
Vaccination Advice
Ladies Swimming

Tuesdays 10:45am - 11:45am
For beginners and improvers. £3 per session at Mounts Swimming Baths, Northampton, NN1 3DN.

Wellbeing and Family Fun

Monthly 3pm - 7pm (Visit Facebook for ongoing updates)
Crafts, Football, Music, Befriending etc.
and more!

Contact Us
Website: https://www.uaassociation.org/
Twitter: https://twitter.com/AfricanAsso
Facebook: https://facebook.com/northamptonuaa/
Instagram: https://instagram.com/unitedafricanassoc/
Email: uafricanassociation@gmail.com
Tel: 07932 519532 or 07508 417140

Registered Office Address
United African Association,Barrat House,Kingsthorpe Road,Northampton,NN2 6EZCharity number: 1192725

9 January 2023

52 acts of kindness: how to spread joy in every week of 2023

Whether fostering kittens, donating blood or delivering boxes of biscuits to striking workers, there has never been a better time to help out; It will improve your life too! Read the full article on The Guardian's website.

Get in Touch
When you email us, please include your name and student number

Email Us

Mental Health Advisers:
mha@northampton.ac.uk

 Counsellors:
 counsellors@northampton.ac.uk

Postal Address
Counselling and Mental Health Team
Riverview Hub, Office 027
Waterside
University Drive
Northampton
NN1 5PH

Urgent Help
Please be aware that the Counselling & Mental Health Team is not a crisis service. If you require urgent support in managing your mental health please ring your doctor, Northamptonshire Mental Health Hub 0800 448 0828 available 24/7, or the out-of-hours NHS telephone number 111, where staff can direct you to a service best placed to meet your health needs.

​Useful Information

Harassment reporting form

